docs/source/brainstorming.rst, before:

PanthR Overview
===============

PanthR is a free web-based tool for statistics. It utilizes HTML5 and Javascript to create a rich environment and perform most statistical computations in the client itself, while at the same time linking to an R backend for more heavy duty tasks.

PanthR consists of 3 logical components:

- A :doc:`Client` written in Javascript. This client utilizes web workers to manage dataset computations. It manages datasets, graphs and other reports. It can work "offline", or by linking to a web server.
- A :doc:`Server` that locally connects to a local R server. The server receives client requests, creates a separate "id" for each client, delegates tasks to the R server, and sends results back to the client. Multiple organizations can run private or public servers, providing size limits for how many clients they can serve. The main page of the PanthR project should keep a list of all those "public mirrors", allowing clients to choose which mirror to try to connect to. Ideally `Servers` should be implemented in multiple programming languages, to suit the needs of each institution's IT department.
- An established :doc:`API` for the communication between client and server. This interface should contain a rich enough syntax to allow the description of any typical task related to a dataset. It should probably contain a versioning system, allowing the possibility of updating the interface to offer more functionality. A client/server could then decide what level of this interface to support.
- A central location, :doc:`PanthR-org`, to act effectively as a distribution center.

Here's a rough picture of the connections.

.. image:: https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/17r-9nYO2rvgvkjlTy9jkZOWDJKfFrZVpADurVDZ95-s/pub?w=480&h=360


Random Thoughts
---------------
- Would be great to enable *shared* data sets, so changes by one client are seen by others.

Commit message:

Make more clear in the broad description, that at the onset there will be essentially only one server.

docs/source/brainstorming.rst, after:

PanthR Overview
===============

PanthR is a free web-based tool for statistics. It utilizes HTML5 and Javascript to create a rich environment and perform most statistical computations in the client itself, while at the same time linking to an R backend for more heavy duty tasks.

PanthR consists of 3 logical components:

- A :doc:`Client` written in Javascript. This client utilizes web workers to manage dataset computations. It manages datasets, graphs and other reports. It can work "offline", or by linking to a web server.
- A :doc:`Server` that locally connects to a local R server. The server receives client requests, creates a separate "id" for each client, delegates tasks to the R server, and sends results back to the client. Multiple organizations can run a server, providing size limits for how many users they can serve. The main page of the PanthR project should keep a list of all those "mirrors", allowing users to connect to a mirror closer to them.
- An established :doc:`API` for the communication between client and server. This interface should contain a rich enough syntax to allow the description of any typical task related to a dataset. It should probably contain a versioning system, allowing the possibility of updating the interface to offer more functionality. A client/server could then decide what level of this interface to support.
- A central location, :doc:`PanthR-org`, to act effectively as a distribution center. At this stage of the project, we ill have only one server and it will act as the distribution center as well.

Here's a rough picture of the connections.

.. image:: https://docs.google.com/drawings/d/17r-9nYO2rvgvkjlTy9jkZOWDJKfFrZVpADurVDZ95-s/pub?w=480&h=360


Random Thoughts
---------------
- Would be great to enable *shared* data sets, so changes by one client are seen by others.
